# File Extensions #

Some file extensions listed are used by multiple applications.

## SIMPL Windows (Symbol Intensive Master Programming Language) ##
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.smw</td>
<td>SIMPL Windows application source normally edited by the SIMPL Windows editor. Normally text but may have binary portions that are encoded (password protected) modules that have been added to the program.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.smw.asv</td>
<td>Auto-saved version - Backup copy of .smw automatically created by loading an SMW and by timer based auto-save.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.umc</td>
<td>User macro. User created module (library) that can be included in SMW projects. Edited using SIMPL Windows editor. Normally plain-text but encoded into binary format if password protected.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.cmc</td>
<td>Crestron Macro. Crestron supplied module (library). Normally text but encoded in binary format if password protected. At one time, I was told, SIMPL Windows would open these files, if they were not password protected, but the current versions detect a file "signature" and prevent the SIMPL Windows editor from opening them.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.usp</td>
<td>SIMPL+ module. Edited using the SIMPL+ editor. Normally text but encoded in binary format if password protected.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.ush</td>
<td>Header file for a .usp file. Automatically generated by compiler at compile time.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.rsd</td>
<td>Remote system definition file. Used to setup intersystem communications between two programs running on the same or different processors.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.lpz</td>
<td>Series 3 proc program zip file. Contains compiler built application package with .bin application, DLLs and metadata required to setup hardware and execution environment. May optionally contain an archive of the program source code if archive option is active at compile-time. The .dip file contains IP ID data that can restored using Toolbox.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.lpz.hash</td>
<td>Contains date/time of application compile.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.spz</td>
<td>Series 2 Proc program zip file. Contains compiler built application package with .bin application and metadata required to setup and execute application.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.bin</td>
<td>Contains SMW compiled code which will be interpreted by LogicEngine.exe.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.sig</td>
<td>Signal file. Signal data file created by compiler and used by Toolbox's debugger.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.smft</td>
<td>SIMPL or System device manifest (?). Created by compiler and lists devices, device IP IDs for Cresnet, Ethernet and RF.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.zig</td>
<td>Zipped .sig file retrieved from a program App slot by SIMPL debugger</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>SPlsWork (folder)</td>
<td>Editor and Compiler temp directory. I believe the editor may use this during program load but it's definitely used by the compiler. It's a good practice to delete this folder. If you sync source directories between computers do not include this folder! Do not archive the folder as it is automatically created at compile time. If SIMPL Windows is crashing during compile, delete this folder and then try to recompile.</td>
</tr>
</table>

## Visual Studio 2008 with S# Libraries ##
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.clz</td>
<td>C# library zip format package</td>
</tr>
</table>


## VisionTools Pro-e or VTPro-e (GUI Design) ##
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.vtp</td>
<td>VTPro-e project (binary)</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.vtz</td>
<td>Compiled file package version of project including all assets such as images, sounds, supporting .swf files in Adobe Air (TSX panels, XPanel) and Flash format (for flash based devices), action scripts and possibly fonts. The original .vtp is not include in this compiled file.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.c3prj.hash</td>
<td>Contains date/time of project compile for Core3 VTPro projects</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.xweb</td>
<td></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.xweb.hash</td>
<td></td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.hex</td>
<td>Compiled binary version of project used on older touch panels</td>
</tr>

</table>

## System Builder (Control System IDE) ##
#### System Builder uses SIMPL, VTPro-e, and Engraver so will generate some of the same file extensions found in those programs in addition to these. ####
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.csb</td>
<td>Crestron System Builder project</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.sba</td>
<td>System Builder archive</td>
</tr>
</table>

## D3 Pro (Control IDE for Lighting, Security, Shades) ##
#### D3 Pro uses SIMPL, VTPro-e, and Engraver so will generate some of the same file extensions found in those programs in addition to these. ####
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.d3p</td>
<td>D3 Pro project file</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.d3a</td>
<td>D3 Pro archive file</td>
</tr>

</table>

## Toolbox Address Book ##
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.xadr</td>
<td>New address book format</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.adr</td>
<td>Old address book format</td>
</tr>

</table>


## Engraver ##
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.egr</td>
<td>Engraver file describing interface elements of Crestron wired keypads, touchpanels, or remotes</td>
</tr>


</table>

## Crestron Studio ##
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>

</table>

## Firmware Updates ##
<table>
<tr>
<td width="10%">Extension</td>
<td width="90%">File Description</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.btl, .csf*, .hex, .upg</td>
<td>These are binary firmware, usually hex encoded with a certain number of bytes per line, that are sent to the device, line by line. The first part of the line may contain a command + memory location or offset to write to. The file <i>may</i> contain a header with a line count or checksum. The device has just enough smarts that it can go into a firmware upgrade mode, receive each line, finally receive a line containing an EOF marker or "complete" command. The device is rebooted and the new firmware is loaded.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.bin, .csf*, .cos</td>
<td>Firmware upgrade binary format</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.csz</td>
<td>Compressed firmware file package</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.cuz</td>
<td>2-Series processor operating system, firmware update file package</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.img</td>
<td>Binary ROM file system upgrade</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.pif</td>
<td>Firmware upgrade file package</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.puf</td>
<td>Firmware file update package. 3-Series processor operating systems come in the .puf format but many other device types, including touchscreens and multi-device PUF files for the DM products may come in this format. See the note about using the PUF tool on the "Best Practices" page.</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.upz</td>
<td>X-Series processor operating system, firmware update package</td>
</tr>

<tr>
<td>.zip</td>
<td>Zip compressed file package</td>
</tr>

</table>

